---
title: "Data: Types, formats, and availability"
date: 2026-01-12
toc: true
tocBorder: true
---

## Date

{{< date >}}

## Links of interest

- [The Wikipedia page on observational accuracy and precision](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accuracy_and_precision).
- [Schoene et al., 2013 explores accuracy and precision in geochronology](https://timslab.princeton.edu/sites/g/files/toruqf2276/files/media/1113518.pdf).
- [Wilkinson et al., 2016 introduced FAIR guiding principles](https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata201618).

## Notes

After testing out our development environments, we discussed:

1. A formal definition for data.
    - Collections of information.
    - Made up of observations or conceptualizations.
    - In the Earth sciences, often (though not always!) measurements of natural phenomena.
    - Made up of *objects*, each with a set of *attributes*.
2. Kinds of attributes (*nominal*, *ordinal*, *interval*, *ratio*) and the fact that values may be either *discrete* or *continuous*.
3. The difference between structured and unstructured data.
4. The idea that measurements are *uncertain*. 
5. Data types and formats. 
6. Formal definition for artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) and what sort of data might be ideal for AI/ML problems. 
   - AI is the *field* of producing behaviors that both mimic and extend human capabilities.
   - ML is a subcategory of AI that uses algorithms (models) to recognize patterns in data and generate insights.
7. The fact that your data should be *open* and follow FAIR guiding principles. Doing so entails:
    - Preserving raw (i.e., unmodified) data.
    - Making the data available to others, typically online, freely accessible, placed in a reliable archive (e.g., Zenodo, Dryad, Pangea, Figshare, etc.), and with an open license.
   - Providing metadata and documentation that makes data easy to understand.
   - Storing data in a standard file format, so that they are easy to use. 
   - Including a digital object identifier so that data are citeable.






